---
title: Finally one more term is gone!
published: 2009-07-20
pt: pt/blog/ac/ufsc091-end
---

Please don't get me wrong: I didn't mean to say I don't like studying Computer Science.
Far from that, this is the field of study I chose to dedicate my life to, and, after some 2 years and a half, it still seems a pretty good choice.

But, after a semester in which I took 6 courses (2 of them legendary for their difficulty) with a total 26 hours of study time per week,
two questions are floating on my mind:

  1. What the hell did the faculty think when formulating our curriculum?
     Despite the fact that all courses which were elective are now required, they still think it's sensible to establish 8 semesters as the appropriate time until graduation...

  2. Do our professors talk to each other when writing syllabuses? My guess: No.
     **At least not sufficiently**. If they interacted a bit more, coursework and exams would be more distributed over time and less stressful.

But after these daunting 4 months not only question were raised.
Amidst headaches and sleepless nights two things became certain:

  1. From now on, I won't take more than 20h/week of coursework.
     The conclusion I came to is that I am a person that is kinda perfectionist, and don't work all too well under pressure.

  2. My graduation will surely take more than 8 semesters.
     In January, this was a big possibilty, now it's a certainty.
     It might even take 10 semester for me to graduate, and despite my wish to do it in 9, it wouldn't be all too bad.

Now there are 2 weeks to rest, ride my bike and try to solve the puzzle that my curriculum for the next 4 semesters has become.
I must also try to cope with the tasks delayed in these last 4 months. Wish me luck!

